Winds of change sweep through Fonterra
Don't bet on Fonterra delivering a dividend at the end its year while the dairy giant undergoes a major revamp.

At this week's first-half result, Fonterra went back into the black after descending into a $348m loss in the previous corresponding period but reported a 29 per cent decline in operating earnings.

Fonterra's already high debt lifted by 4 per cent to $7.4 billion, taking its gearing 52.5 per cent compared with its target range of 40 to 45 per cent.

The co-op put the increased debt down to seasonal factors and said it was confident asset sales worth $800m could be achieved to get back within the desired range.
FCNZ analyst and long-time Fonterra watcher, Arie Dekker, noted that Fonterra had committed to financial discipline with the final dividend decision depending on full-year earnings and balance sheet.

Dekker assumed that no dividend for 2019 would be paid "given the uncertainty that exists currently."

"While the first half highlights that the full year 2019 will be another disappointing year, we view Fonterra's journey on strategic and asset portfolio reviews as the necessary precursor to getting a better understanding of where Fonterra is going and the investment case," he said in a research note.

Over the next six months Fonterra will move through a full review of strategy, its investments, major assets and partnerships and will make initial moves to reduce debt.

Dekker expects the co-op to focus on its and capex requirements, its longer-term intentions on capital structure and to address how it intends to remain competitive for milk supply in New Zealand, where it has significant base of "stainless steel" capacity.

"Fonterra must be realistic about its capability and 'DNA' through this process, having seen significant value destruction as it has invested away from its core business without the capital structure to necessarily withstand bumps along the way," he said.
Amazon to launch mobile ads, threatening Google and Facebook
Amazon has found a new way to grab a chunk of the US$129 billion (NZ$187b) digital advertising market now dominated by Google and Facebook: selling video spots on the e-commerce giant's smartphone shopping app.

Amazon has been beta testing the ads on Apple's iOS platform for several months, according to people familiar with the plan. A similar product for Google's Android platform is planned for later this year, said the people, who asked not to be identified because they're not authorized to share the information publicly.

The brief video spots appear in response to search results on the shopping app, valuable space for advertisers since people searching for products on the app have a higher propensity to buy than those scrolling through Facebook or watching videos on Google's YouTube.

Amazon has emerged as a fast-growing challenger in the digital advertising market because it captures 50 per cent of all online sales in the US Amazon's digital advertising market share will grow to 8.8 per cent this year from 6.8 per cent in 2018, according to EMarketer. Market leader Google will see its share slip to 37.2 per cent from 38.2 per cent.

ADVERTISEMENT

Advertise with NZME.
Amazon, through a spokeswoman, declined to comment. A spokesman for Google didn't immediately respond to a request for comment.

Selling more video ads opens a new revenue opportunity for Amazon's advertising division, which mostly sells space featuring brand logos, product photographs and descriptions that are the equivalent of digital billboards. Video ad spots are similar to television commercials and can deepen the power of promotion.

Brands will spend nearly $16 billion on mobile video advertising this year, up 22.6 per cent from 2018, according to EMarketer. Advertisers are shifting their spending to follow the growing number of people watching videos on mobile devices and are making brief video snippets to appeal to people on the go. Such ads are common on YouTube and in Facebook streams.

For years, Amazon refrained from selling advertising space on its site for fear of disrupting the shopping experience. Instead, it used price, product descriptions and consumer reviews to determine which products were most prominent on the page. The site is increasingly a pay-to-play platform, with the top of the page dedicated to the highest bidder, a shift that has helped boost Amazon's profits.

Amazon began adding more product-related videos to the site two years ago to prevent shoppers from defecting to YouTube and Instagram to watch video demonstrations and testimonials from influencers not found on Amazon. Many of those video posts on other platforms feature links to sites other than Amazon, where shoppers could buy products. Amazon's lack of video content revealed a weakness in shopper engagement and product discovery other sites were providing better.

The latest video ad push is a continuation of that effort to put more product videos on the platform. Amazon is requiring a $35,000 ad budget to run the spots at 5 cents per view to run the ads for 60 days, one person said. Prices can vary by category, said another person, and not everyone pays a fixed rate.
Facebook blames bad actors, media and users for attack video going viralCOMMENT:

Earlier this week, someone from Facebook other than Mark Zuckerberg was kind enough to provide the world with "a further update" on the New Zealand terrorist attack.

In a nearly 1900-word post, the company's vice president of product management Guy Rosen explains that the inability of Facebook to control the rapid circulation of the video on its platform wasn't its fault.

"This isn't the first time violent, graphic videos, whether live streamed or not, have gone viral on various online platforms," Rosen says.

ADVERTISEMENT

Advertise with NZME.
The combination of factors that allowed the video to spread, Rosen argues, was, firstly, the coordinated effort by "bad actors" to distribute the video; secondly, media channels that chose to run the video in their coverage; and lastly, individuals who re-shared copies they got from different apps and services.

Rosen doubles down on blaming the media, saying "distribution was further propelled by broad reporting of the existence of a video, which may have prompted people to seek it out."

Facebook users themselves don't get off that easy. You see, they didn't help Facebook do its job properly. As Rosen explains: "During the entire live broadcast, we did not get a single user report. This matters because reports we get while a video is broadcasting live are prioritised for accelerated review."

MORE:
• Front up, Zuck
• Up to 14 years' jail for video sharers as Commissioner asks Facebook to give police names
• Kiwis lose jobs for sharing massacre video at work
• Philip Neville Arps in custody for allegedly sharing footage of shooting
• Masterton woman arrested for Facebook post after mosque shooting
• Ray White real estate agents removed over racially charged Facebook posts

Rosen twice repeats that the video itself had only been video 200 times when it was live, a refrain Facebook has been pushing hard across its PR efforts in the aftermath of the massacre. The argument goes that it was from this base of 200 views that reworkings of the video were allowed to proliferate through the internet.

To be clear, the expectation here is that someone who stumbles upon a piece of shocking piece of content is immediately required to engage their rational senses to report the matter to very platform that is allowing this content to be distributed. I urge anyone who saw the video to think back to their first response at seeing the footage and to consider whether the thought of reporting the footage to Facebook even crossed their mind. Chances are, you were more likely trying your best to process what the hell was going on in your country.
Spark boss Simon Moutter ribs new Sky TV CEO Martin Stewart - but there's a messy truth underneath
"Early days, but Sky TV's new boss seems promising," I tweeted last night.

"Promising apart from being a Chelsea supporter, that is."

Spark MD Simon Moutter shot back, "Which he will need to buy Spark Sport to watch them on later this year!!!"

Kym Niblock, CIO at Spark's free-to-air partner TVNZ, weighed in with some laughing-til-I-cry emojis.

ADVERTISEMENT

Advertise with NZME.
It was all a good chuckle, but underneath the quips, there's an annoying truth for sports fans: for many codes, they'll have to buy both the $20/month Spark Sport plus a Sky Sport package to see all the action.

For English football, for example, Spark Sport has indeed grabbed rights to the Premier League for three years from June.

But Sky retains rights to almost everything else soccer related, from Euro 2020 to the FA Cup and the Uefa Champions League (which will feature the top four English Premier League teams) and the Uefa Europa Cup, where the fifth- and sixth-finishing EPL teams will play.

NBA fans, similarly, will soon find some US basketball coverage on Spark Sport, and some still on Sky.

Chelsea star Eden Hazard. Photo / Getty.
Chelsea star Eden Hazard. Photo / Getty.
And of course Sky Sport-subscribing rugby fans will have to sign on to Spark Sport to see the Rugby World Cup later this year - plus whatever other local rugby the telco signs up as it partners with NEP, the world's largest outside sports producer, which has recently set up shop in NZ.

And while competition is good, and will drive more content and viewing options for sports fans, it could also get more expensive still. In the UK, for example, football fans now need to subscribe to Amazon Prime, Sky UK and BT Sport to see all Premier League games.



Tourism New Zealand has suspended marketing around the world following the terror attacks in Christchurch as all Government spending on social media platforms is reviewed.

Tourism NZ says the ''pause'' is across all marketing platforms.

It spends about 80 per cent of its $45.3 million annual advertising budget in digital channels, which give it deep international reach. These include Facebook and Google-owned YouTube, which have been widely condemned for allowing offensive content to be run on their sites.

Tourism NZ has had a long collaboration including content partnerships with Facebook.

"In response to the event [in Christchurch] we have paused our marketing activity across all advertising platforms,'' said the general manager, New Zealand and Government Relations, Rebecca Ingram.

''At this stage it's too early to say how and when we will start promotion again. We are currently working with our key markets to inform our approach."'

Fifty people were killed in the attacks on two mosques last Friday, March 15.

The Tourism NZ Facebook page has more than 3 million followers. In the comments section are photos of the alleged Christchurch gunman, a disabled link to video of the killings and comments about the killings, some critical of the country and others praising the response.

These are interspersed with separate and more typical observations from tourists who enjoyed their holidays here.

When these were pointed out, a spokeswoman said its social media accounts were monitored and this had been ''amplified'' since last Friday.

Tourism New Zealand suspends promotion of country overseas; Facebook, YouTube strategy under review


Death throes of a dairy co-operative: Westland Milk a loss of more than just money
"I hope we can now get on with the business of running our own dairy company as we have been doing successfully for over 65 years."

Those optimistic words in 2002 from Westland Milk Products' then-chairman Ian Robb are now a bittersweet memory. Back then, the dairy co-operative had just rejected joining the newly formed Fonterra. Today, farmers in the rugged, remote region are being asked to sell a nearly 150-year-old dairying heritage to China.

Westland's farmer-owners this week began gathering in towns up and down the Coast to hear the first pitches from directors to sell their financially-embattled co-op to Asia's biggest dairy producer, Yili.

There's little room for sentiment about the old days.

ADVERTISEMENT

Advertise with NZME.
Westland hasn't been paying its farmers a competitive milk price for several years.

The kitty is stretched, the company is heavily in debt and the banks are breathing down its neck.

In turn, many of Westland's 429 farmers, still on their knees from the last global milk price slump, are feeling the heat from bankers.

Even if they wanted to – and many don't - they can't sell their farms.

Who wants to buy a dairy farm with an income that lags well behind what is being paid to other New Zealand farmers via the industry benchmark, created by market price-setter Fonterra?

To continue to stand alone, Westland would need to gouge "significant" amounts from its already too-skinny milk payouts in the form of retentions.

As chairman Pete Morrison says, that's just not realistic. "Our farmers can't afford that."

Out of the 26 parties who answered the Westland board's call last year for a white knight with capital, Yili has emerged with the best offer - a buyout deal worth $588 million, including taking on Westland's debt and liabilities.

Pete Morrison, chair of Westland Milk Products. Photo/Supplied. 
Pete Morrison, chair of Westland Milk Products. Photo/Supplied.
According to Westland, the nominal value of its shares has ranged from 70c to $1.50 per share. Yili is offering $3.41 per share, subject to that being within or above an independent adviser's valuation range. The debt and other assumed liabilities total $342.5m.

For the average-sized Westland supply farm, the share offer translates to about half a million dollars cash.

And there are extra sweeteners in this conditional deal. Yili has committed to collect all milk supply – not to be sneezed at given the remoteness of some West Coast farms.

And it will pay a competitive payout of at least as much as the Fonterra farmgate milk price, for 10 years from the season that starts on August 1 this year.

What that milk price might be is anyone's guess, but if Fonterra's and Westland's respective forecasts for this current season are any indication, it'll be very hard for struggling farmers to say no.

Fonterra is forecasting that it will pay $6.30-$6.60 per kilogram of milksolids. Westland's forecast is $6-$6.20. Last season Fonterra paid $6.69, while Westland paid $6.12.

To go ahead, the Yili takeover needs 75 per cent shareholder support and must also be approved by shareholders holding more than 50 per cent of the shares eligible to be voted.

As well as shareholder approval, the deal - formally, a scheme of arrangement - needs High Court approval. It also requires the tick from the Overseas Investment Office (OIO).

Morrison doesn't anticipate a problem with the OIO. Yili has been in New Zealand since 2013 when it acquired the South Canterbury-based dairy company Oceania. Since then it has invested about $650m in establishing milk powder, infant formula and UHT production lines for Oceania.

Westgold Milk Products, made by Westland Milk. Photo/Supplied. 
Westgold Milk Products, made by Westland Milk. Photo/Supplied.
But shareholder approval is far from a given despite Morrison's conviction that "this is a fantastic deal for our farmers".

Westland is a farmer co-operative. If it is sold, there will be only two dairy co-ops left in New Zealand: Fonterra and Tatua in the Waikato.

They are getting scarcer, but "co-operative" is still a holy word in the dairying lexicon.

Surrendering that status will be a big wrench for the West Coast's farming stalwarts, particularly given their fierce show of independent pride in voting to stay outside the big industry merger which formed Fonterra.

"It's bloody sad," says one industry commentator. "Back then they had money in the bank, a strong balance sheet and they were about to get a cash payment ($84m) for their Dairy Board shares.

"They've gone from that to today having no other choice to do what they've done. They'll be incredibly sad to lose their co-operative."

But the Yili offer provides no more certainty about the future than Fonterra offered back in 2001, says another observer.

He's surprised the Westland board has opted for a buyout trade sale rather than a joint venture like the Silver Fern Farms model that could have retained the co-operative.

But was that model even on the table? Morrison won't say.

Nor does he want to discuss the fact that Fonterra approached the Westland board before it began the formal search for new capital.

Fonterra chairman John Monaghan: "We approached the board directly to try to find a co-operative solution for West Coast farmers but we were unable to participate."

Monaghan says it's not in the long-term interests of this country's dairy farmers for the value of New Zealand milk to go overseas.

He notes that farming is a long-term, intergenerational business and Yili's 10-year milk price commitment "is a relatively short time in farming".

"The question is what happens to farmers at that point?"

Morrison will only say: "We went through a process. Our key drivers from the beginning were a competitive payout for all our farmers and guaranteed [milk] pickup for all our farmers given some are geographically isolated.

"Anyone involved in the process [who] couldn't fulfil those criteria weren't considered.

"We looked at standing alone and going to our shareholders [for capital] and using retained earnings or going to our banks. We looked at a cornerstone investor in the early part and we looked at a full trade sale and that's what this is.

"This provided the best value and outcome for all our farmers."

Westland Milk's jersey cows. Photo/Supplied. 
Westland Milk's jersey cows. Photo/Supplied.
As Federated Farmers vice-president and Fonterra dairy farmer Andrew Hoggard wryly notes, "[Westland] shareholders are being offered money for their shares – Fonterra would've been asking them for money [to buy Fonterra shares]."

Hoggard is a strong supporter of the co-operative model but as he says, Fonterra has its own financial issues to overcome right now.

"Are we in a position to let them [Westland] come in at no cost?"

Fonterra jumping in would have been a bad idea, says another industry participant.

Fonterra doesn't have the money anyway and its farmers wouldn't be happy about "a sweetheart deal to bail out Westland shareholders", he reckons.

Poor governance is to blame for Westland's situation, say most commentators.

In the words of one Westland shareholder, "it is poor governance that's led them to this position – West Coast people have done it to themselves".

"They had a very very strong balance sheet when they decided not to join Fonterra but over a period of time and poor governance, they've ended up with far too much debt.

"Taking on new milk at $1.50 a share affected all shareholder capital in the company."

The ANZ bank, New Zealand's biggest rural lender and, the Herald understands, the West Coast's main dairy banker, declined to comment.

Westland shareholder Terry Sheridan is a strong critic of the top table.

He points the finger at the board and the past and present executives. "Debt is so great now it's beyond shareholders."

For three years now, his farm has been on the market.

But Westland farmers still have a choice, Sheridan says.

"Twenty-five per cent can turn this down. I want to hear the full story. I want to see the details.

"Too many things aren't clear. We don't know if our farms are going to be tied in for 10 years. When we sell our farm does it have to be transferred to the new owner?"

Sheridan says an example of Westland's poor governance is that it has a plant building programme even while it is in debt and searching for a rescuer.

"Nothing should have been done while that was going on but they're talking about building milk transfer plants and giving farmers more indebtedness than they already had.

"There is no governance."

Sheridan would have liked Fonterra to have been involved but shareholders were never told about its interest, he says.

Several commentators believe a Yili buyout would crank up the pressure on Fonterra, as milk price setter, to perform.

Westland Milk Products factory. Photo/Supplied. 
Westland Milk Products factory. Photo/Supplied.
Morrison has been chairman for three years and a shareholder since 1998.

He doesn't want to talk about past governance and decisions, including the one to pursue extra milk supply from Canterbury, but to charge only $1.50 for a supply share. And not to retain earnings over the years to strengthen the balance sheet.

"The board and management at the time must have thought it was okay. I don't want to denigrate the past. We need to deal with the issue we currently have."

Morrison says his own farm business makes a point of supporting co-operatives, "but they do have trouble raising capital and they need to distribute as much money as possible to their farmer-shareholders."

He voted in 2001 for Westland to stand alone.

He took on the chairman's job to "try to help with governance to get a competitive payout".

"I am a farmer and that's what I needed along with everyone else.

"But I did say that if I didn't think we could deliver on that we would be looking at alternative structures so we could get a competitive payout.

"This process has delivered on that 100 per cent."

Pressed on the quality of Westland's governance, Morrison says a governance review last year was supported by 93 per cent of shareholders in a vote. The board was reduced from 11 directors to eight.

"It has certainly led to better behaviours in the boardroom.

"This is a tough decision and we haven't made it lightly. We all understand the ownership issue. I was there when we voted to stand alone and I'm very proud of that.

"But I also want all the farming families here now to be able to have a competitive payout so they can keep their farms."

The West Coast might lose a co-operative, but dairying there could get a shot in the arm, suggest some observers.

"Westland's had some horrible years in terms of payout, this should put a bit of confidence back. Also Yili is a huge company - this is a signal of its confidence in dairying and New Zealand," says one.

Morrison says Yili has indicated that it wants to keep all present management and staff. A committee of five Westland farmers would be the liaison between Yili and suppliers.

While Sheridan doesn't agree that shareholders have no choice but to accept the deal, he worries about the alternative, which he says is "a black hole".

Asked what Plan B is if the Yili deal does not come off, Morrison says: "This is a very good plan. We're going to promote it as hard as we can."

For Fonterra Shareholders' Council chairman Duncan Coull, the Westland situation should be a wake-up call to co-operative dairy farmers.

"Farmers need to start seriously considering how we save us from ourselves. We need to start valuing what we have. Companies want to come to New Zealand to share in our provenance story and we seem to be determined to give it away for nothing."

Or as another dairy farmer puts it: "Public companies will only pay what they have to to get milk and they pay at the co-operative price.

"Look around the world – where there are weak co-operatives, public companies make a lot of money. Where there are strong co-operatives, they don't."


Matthew Hooton: After Christchurch mosque shootings, Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern's moment has comeCOMMENT

For the Prime Minister, it is as if all her past life has been but a preparation for this hour and for this trial.

In the last week Jacinda Ardern has demonstrated the empathy of Ronald Reagan after the Challenger disaster and the steely resolve of Margaret Thatcher after the Brighton hotel bombing.

Consequently, New Zealand will heal faster than it may have otherwise. Recent immigrants and our well-established Muslim communities are hopefully now in no doubt where they stand with the overwhelming majority of their fellow citizens. With any luck, the Government's proposed gun control solution can command unanimity in the House.

Looking ahead, global admiration for our Prime Minister means the economic effects on the tourism and education services sectors will be much less than they might have been. Ironically, precisely because the Prime Minister's outstanding leadership has laid a platform for an early return to normality, we will soon be back to arguing over things like the capital gains tax (CGT) and KiwiBuild.

But the political context has changed.

The Prime Minister has an opportunity to use her new-found ascendancy to act decisively across a range of issues. If she really believes in a CGT, for example, she can now be more assertive in demanding Winston Peters fall into line. Similarly, she need no longer defend failing programmes like KiwiBuild but has more freedom to replace them.

The Prime Minister is also empowered to act boldly in getting to the bottom of whatever intelligence failure led to the terrorist attack. It is not acceptable for spy chiefs to argue there was nothing that could be done because the terrorist was not known to law enforcement or the courts.

The very nature of policing and criminal justice is that they can only respond to crimes that have occurred. The role of intelligence agencies is to fill the gap between emerging and manifest threats.

In the past week, Jacinda Ardern has shown a mix of empathy and steely resolve. Photo, SNPA
In the past week, Jacinda Ardern has shown a mix of empathy and steely resolve. Photo, SNPA
It reflects badly on those who head our intelligence agencies that they have not recognised that the very fact of 50 people, fellow citizens and visitors, being murdered in a terrorist attack calls for at least a symbolic offer to resign.

Related articles:
NEW ZEALAND
Assault rifle and military style semi-automatic weapons to be banned
21 Mar, 2019 5:32pm
 9 minutes to read
HAWKE'S BAY TODAY
Silent cheer as Government bans semi-automatics
22 Mar, 2019 6:00am
 2 minutes to read
NEW ZEALAND
Semi-automatics and assault rifles banned in NZ
21 Mar, 2019 4:53pm
 10 minutes to read
NEW ZEALAND
Implications gun holders face over soon-to-be illegal weapons
21 Mar, 2019 5:02pm
 3 minutes to read
Moreover, the inquiry into their performance must not be the usual Wellington whitewash with a retired judge or former Cabinet Minister appointed to conclude that no one could have reasonably foreseen this specific attack on this specific day. The Prime Minister ought to appoint inquirers from outside the Wellington establishment with proven investigative skills to genuinely seek answers.

How is it possible, for example, that those who buy multiple powerful firearms don't automatically come to the attention of the spies, at least so other risk factors can be explored? Have the intelligence agencies become too interested in foreign threats on the one hand and inward-looking team-building exercises on the other?

Why is our internet search history and social media activity able to be monitored to such an extent to know what books, music, movies, holidays, underwear and pornography we might like, but not if we are visiting known white supremacist and other hate sites?

Were John Key's staff wrong to put a brake on the GCSB's SPEARGUN proposal that might have given it the same capability as social media companies seem to have? And what are we to make of those who publicly opposed even the less sophisticated intelligence gathering apparatus that has clearly failed?

New Zealand can never succeed, on any measure, by cowering behind a wall. Not just our economic destiny but our national identity depends on us maintaining the sense of adventure that brought us all here.
SHARE THIS QUOTE:

Perhaps most crucially, the Prime Minister is perfectly suited to lead the nation in rejecting hatred and xenophobia and again embracing liberalism and cosmopolitanism.

One party is most guilty of fomenting hatred for political gain but enough has been said about it over 25 years.

More important is where our two main parties stand on these issues.

The Labour Party disgraced itself in its most recent term in opposition with its stunt on Chinese-sounding names and by joining with the extreme left in opposing the Trans-Pacific Partnership on the grounds that it would undermine national sovereignty. Not to be outdone, National disgraced itself even more in finding alliance with the extreme right over an almost certainly irrelevant UN compact on migration, using the same ridiculous lines about alleged breaches of sovereignty.

In challenging this nonsense, the business community and the political right have an important role to play.

Misplaced nostalgia often papers over the fact that New Zealand before the 1980s was an inward-looking and profoundly racist country that made little space for difference or non-British cultures, including even the indigenous one. The reforms of the 1980s and early 1990s were about economics but they were also about culture, confidence and national identity. New Zealand would not cower behind a wall.

As a trading nation populated by people every one of whose ancestors took enormous risks to come here in just the last thousand years, the case was made by the likes of the late Roger Kerr that New Zealand should be open and welcoming to the world and its people.

Somewhere that vision has been lost, with business lobbyists becoming more interested in the minutiae of the latest MBIE subsidy scheme rather than boldly making the case for free and open markets and globalisation. There are even those on the political right who have rejected the legacy of the 1980s and express admiration for Donald Trump.

New Zealand can never succeed, on any measure, by cowering behind a wall. Not just our economic destiny but our national identity depends on us maintaining




 the sense of adventure that brought us all here and extending manaakitanga to those who want to join us, visit us, do business with us, or take a holiday or study here.

Those of us who believe in these things should no longer reject the term neo-liberal, so often used as abuse, but reclaim it. What is the alternative: to be old conservatives? The political right needs to get back on track.

Founder of 8chan, one of the internet's darkest corners, expresses regret following Christchurch mosque shootingFredrick Brennan, the founder of a message board known as one of the darkest corners on the internet, says the website 8chan has gone too far.

The alleged gunman who killed 50 people when he open fired inside two Christchurch mosques on Friday posted a message on the website saying he would commit the terror attack just hours before he carried it out and livestreamed it on Facebook.

There have since been comments and memes on the site praising the gunman's actions and his white supremacist-views.

Now, Brennan, who is no longer associated with the website, said he believed the administrators of 8chan were too slow in removing the post.

In an interview, Brennan told the Wall Street Journal that he found the days after the shooting difficult knowing that he had created the website.

He said the website and the toxic culture within it would likely result in another mass shooting.

"It wouldn't surprise me if this happens again," he said.

Brennan, 25, spent years moderating the site which is known to be home to racist and abusive content, and harassment campaigns promoting violence. He worked as an administrator up until 2016 and until December worked for the owners of the website.

"I just feel like I wasted too much time on this stuff," Brennan said, expressing regret in the interview with the Journal.

"I didn't spend enough time making friends in real life."

Related articles:
NEW ZEALAND
Nats back assault rifle ban, farmers group supports
21 Mar, 2019 2:39pm
 4 minutes to read
LIFESTYLE
Wellington cafe's comical Egg Boy sign praised by Kiwis
21 Mar, 2019 1:22pm
 3 minutes to read
NEW ZEALAND
Mosque shootings: Honouring the dead - Muhammad Haziq Mohd-Tarmizi, 17
21 Mar, 2019 11:56am
 Quick Read
BUSINESS
Gun City sells out of rifle used in Christchurch terror attack
21 Mar, 2019 11:04am
 3 minutes to read
8chan is similar to another site called 4chan but discussions are heavily driven by images. It is understood to attract around 100,000 people to the site daily.

On the 8chan the alleged Christchurch mosque shootings gunman posted an 80-page manifesto and called on members to spread his message.

Following the attack users have reportedly posted hundreds of messages, videos and altered photos of the shooting with the intention of creating viral memes and promote division.

NZ internet service providers including Spark, Vodafone, 2degrees and Vocus have blocked several sites hosting footage of the attack, which has been banned by NZ Chief Censor David Shanks.

The telcos have not published a running list of banned sites, but the user reports indicate it includes both 4chan and 8 chan.




New Sky TV boss trashes his company's own Fanpass serviceNew Sky TV boss Martin Stewart hints that his company should never have lost the 2019 Rugby World Cup to Spark, and needs to repair relationships with NZ Rugby and other content partners as it looks to re-establish itself as "the home of sport."

MORE: Spark boss ribs new Sky TV CEO

The ex-pat Brit has kind words for Spark's first foray into sports streaming with the Melbourne Grand Prix.

"Fair play to Spark, they've got a beta site up and running and it looks good in a short space of time - well done," he says.

ADVERTISEMENT

Advertise with NZME.
But his assessment of Sky's own sports streaming app, Fanpass, is blunt.

"The problem is that we've got 12 channels and our affiliate partners on Sky Sport. We put four onto Fanpass.

"Then we say, 'You can only have it on two devices.'

"Then we say, 'You can't cast it to a big screen.'

"And if all that hasn't been enough to put you off buying it, we make it $99 [a month]."

Stewart promises a Fanpass app with more attractive pricing, the ability to stream content to big screen TV and a lot more content, soon - though four weeks into his tenure, he won't be pinned down on an exact timeline.

Related articles:
BUSINESS
How Spark Sport fared in its first test
18 Mar, 2019 9:34am
 5 minutes to read
BUSINESS
Sky TV director of sport out the door: insider
26 Feb, 2019 4:30pm
 3 minutes to read
BUSINESS
Sky TV sheds a further 28,000 subscribers as profit drops 20 per cent
20 Feb, 2019 8:35am
 3 minutes to read
BUSINESS
Comment: Five ways to save Sky TV
7 Oct, 2018 2:22pm
 9 minutes to read
And while he's at it, the entertainment-focused Neon app and Sky TV on Demand will get substantially more content, too, Stewart says. And he wants the apps on as many platforms as possible, from Apple TV to Xbox.

He says his company has world-class sports and entertainment content, it's just that it's not utilising it online.

There were suggestions that Stewart's predecessor, John Fellet, purposefully knee-capped Fanpass, and other apps and online services in the Sky stable, for fear of cannibalising Sky's shrinking but higher-margin traditional satellite business.

"I'm looking at the balance of investment and this time I want to see us do a lot more on the streaming side of the business," Stewart says.

Sky subscriber numbers rose year after year to a peak in 2015 before falling away as new online competition proliferated. 
Sky subscriber numbers rose year after year to a peak in 2015 before falling away as new online competition proliferated.
"We have to put more effort into that streaming side and how we utilise what we've got. So I'm focussed on that for now and we'll let the other side rumble on for now. New generation decoder boxes take a long time.

"I want the team focussed on how we do much more, much more quickly on the streaming side."

Rugby World Cup loss hurts
There have been two high-profile departures during Stewart's first month in charge: director of sport Richard Last, whose abrupt exit was leaked to the Herald, and CFO Jason Hollingworth, who headed to a job at Vector.

Did Last walk the plank for losing the Rugby World Cup?

"We have to adapt and evolve for the next period of time. A lot of the team have been with the company a long time, and sometimes you need a bit of a change of direction, a bit of a refresh," Stewart replies, talking around the question.

The Herald tries another tack: would Stewart have preferred Sky to have kept the World Cup?

"I would, yes. I would. It's the World Cup of Rugby Union and the home of the All Blacks," he says.

"I can't second-guess history - but I'm determined that Sky Sport will be seen as the home of sport. And that means retaining and building on the key rights that we have - not letting them go.

"It's a question of understanding the brand promise that you're trying to live up to. So if we are the home of sports, that means retaining sports rights. In that case, [the World Cup], it's about doing what you have to do."

Would NZ Rugby be classed as a content partner?

"Yes, very much. And they should be a very strong partner."

He adds, "We've got to remember that our content partners are partners and we've got to work with them in a mutually beneficial way - which we used to, and we can again."

Catalogue of challenges
Sky TV's problems have been well-catalogued, from Netflix's challenge for its entertainment audience to Spark's sports insurgency to the search for a 'plan B' after the ComCom nixed its merger with Vodafone NZ, the rise of live-sports piracy, declining subs, falling average revenue per user and a sagging share price.

Stewart seems set to grasp the nettle with streaming (although he's wary of details at this early stage, and cautions contacts will have to favourable for apps to spread to more platforms.

But otherwise, things are still at the assessment stage.

In 2015, Sky TV shares touched $7. But its stock has since sagged over the Netflix threat, the failure of its Vodafone NZ merge, the Spark Sport insurgency, falling subs and disappearing dividends.
In 2015, Sky TV shares touched $7. But its stock has since sagged over the Netflix threat, the failure of its Vodafone NZ merge, the Spark Sport insurgency, falling subs and disappearing dividends.
The previous Sky TV regime promised an Android-powered "puck" that would receive all of its channel and on-demand content via broadband - and said it would be with us during February just gone.

A decoder upgrade was also promised for satellite customers, and an all-app, all-ondemand service by the end of the year for the online crowd.

Stewart is holding off a revised timeline and product timeline until he's got the lay of the land.

He says it will be completed soon. He's already talked to nearly all of Sky's 1100 staff, all of its major content partners and - via a three and a half week holiday tour of New Zealand after he arrived in the country on January 20 - everyday viewers.

The new focus on streaming implies a leaner organisation.

After all, streaming is a meaner, lower-margin business than linear TV. Even streaming king Netflix leans on its traditional DVD rental unit for profit most quarters and is staggering under a US$10b debt load. Disney lost US$580m on Netflix rival Hulu last year.

Stewart won't be drawn on any possible changes to headcount, but for the short term at least, he indicates there won't be anything as wrenching as the process underway at marketing partner Vodafone NZ, where another new CEO, Jason Paris, is making his mark.

Style shift
Already, there are signs of a difference in style.

Stewart meets the Herald at Sky's well-appointed sales office in upmarket Newmarket. His predecessor, John Fellet (who remains on Sky's board), always favoured the pay TV broadcaster's earthier main office in light-industrial Mt Wellington, where no shareholders' money was wasted on TVNZ-style neon lighting or, in some areas, new carpet.

Fellet favoured formal attire. Stewart is casually dressed.

And while Sky's previous top trio tended to be defensive about the company's satellite business, and at times seemed to be starving the wobbly Sky Go streaming effort, Stewart says he's looking ahead.

"I do tend to be a streamer," he says. He maintains he watches most of his content on an iPad, though does look to the big screen for news or a game featuring his favoured Premier League side (Chelsea).

How will Spark fare with the Rugby World Cup?

"I have no idea how they will do. I personally think it's more likely than not to be a success, because if I were them I'd spend whatever it takes," Stewart says.

"But I think the question they'll be asked after all the dust settles is, 'Was it worth it?'

"So it's not just a question of 'Will it be a success?', it's a question of money." (Spark has so far refused to detail any World Cup or Spark Sport costs. It ways it will do so at its first post-World Cup financial report, expected mid-February).

Stewart declines to be videoed, but is an easy and open communicator and seems ready to use his licence as an outsider and newcomer to abandon some of Sky's past thinking.

Just how much, we'll find out in the weeks ahead.

Forsyth Barr rates Sky TV "underperform," with a 12-month target of $1.55, while Milford Asset Management Portfolio Manager Sam Trethewey recently dismissed it as a "sunset business."

Shares [NZX:SKT] were recently trading at $1.36.

Who is Martin Stewart?
UK-born Martin Stewart came to Sky TV from his role as chief executive at OSN, a pay TV network in the Middle East.

He was chief financial officer at BSkyB in the UK between 1998 and 2004 when the media firm doubled its subscriber base.

And in 2009 to 2010 he led the successful turnaround of Ono, a leading telecom operator in Spain, which is now part of Vodafone.


"I'm looking at the balance of investment and this time I want to see us do a lot more on the streaming side of the business," Stewart says. Photo / Doug Sherring.
Stewart's sports credentials include being CFO of the Football Association (FA) for a six-month stint in 2016, serving on the Board of the London Organising Committee for the Olympic and Paralympic Games for seven years and playing a key role in successful Premier League and UEFA broadcast renewals on behalf of BSkyB.